Git is a distributed version control system (VCS) that helps developers track changes to files and collaborate on projects, especially when working on software development. It allows multiple people to work on the same codebase simultaneously, keeping track of all changes, branches, and merges.
Key features of Git include:
Version Control: Git keeps a history of changes made to a project, allowing developers to revert to earlier versions if necessary.
Distributed: Unlike centralized version control systems, Git allows every user to have a full copy of the project repository with its entire history on their local machine. This enables developers to work offline and independently of a central server.
Branching and Merging: Git makes it easy to create branches (isolated environments) to work on features or fixes without affecting the main codebase. Once the work is complete, branches can be merged back into the main code.
Collaboration: Developers can collaborate by pushing their changes to remote repositories (such as on platforms like GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket), where others can pull the updates, merge them, or review the code.

Git commands:
1. Configuration Commands
git config --global user.name "Your Name": Set your name for Git commits.
git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com": Set your email for Git commits.
git config --list: Show your Git configuration settings.
2. Repository Creation
git init: Initialize a new Git repository in the current directory.
git clone <repository_url>: Clone a remote repository to your local machine.
3. Basic Workflow Commands
git status: Show the status of changes (which files are modified, staged, etc.).
git add <file>: Stage a file for commit.
git add .: Stage all changed files.
git commit -m "message": Commit staged changes with a message.
git commit --amend: Amend the previous commit (e.g., change the commit message or add new changes).
git push: Push committed changes to a remote repository.
git pull: Fetch and merge changes from the remote repository.
git fetch: Fetch changes from a remote repository without merging them.
4. Branching Commands
git branch: List all local branches.
git branch <branch_name>: Create a new branch.
git checkout <branch_name>: Switch to a different branch.
git checkout -b <branch_name>: Create a new branch and switch to it.
git merge <branch_name>: Merge changes from a different branch into the current branch.
git branch -d <branch_name>: Delete a local branch.
git branch -D <branch_name>: Force delete a branch, even if it hasn't been merged.
5. Remote Repository Commands
git remote -v: Show the remotes associated with the repository.
git remote add <remote_name> <repository_url>: Add a remote repository.
git push <remote_name> <branch_name>: Push the specified branch to the remote repository.
git pull <remote_name> <branch_name>: Pull changes from a specific branch in the remote repository.
git fetch <remote_name>: Fetch changes from a remote without merging.
git remote remove <remote_name>: Remove a remote repository.
6. Staging and Undoing Changes
git diff: Show changes between your working directory and the last commit.
git diff <file>: Show changes in a specific file.
git reset <file>: Unstage a file (move from staged to unstaged).
git reset --hard: Reset the working directory and staging area to the last commit (destructive).
git checkout -- <file>: Discard changes in a file in your working directory.
git restore <file>: Restore a file from the latest commit (similar to git checkout).
7. History and Log Commands
git log: View the commit history of the repository.
git log --oneline: View a condensed, single-line version of the commit history.
git show <commit_hash>: Show detailed information about a specific commit.
git blame <file>: Show the commit history for each line in a file.
git reflog: Show the history of changes made to the repository’s HEAD (useful for recovering lost commits).
8. Tagging Commands
git tag: List all tags.
git tag <tag_name>: Create a new tag at the current commit.
git tag -a <tag_name> -m "message": Create an annotated tag.
git push <remote_name> <tag_name>: Push a tag to a remote repository.
git push --tags: Push all tags to a remote repository.
git tag -d <tag_name>: Delete a local tag.
9. Advanced Commands
git cherry-pick <commit_hash>: Apply the changes from a specific commit to the current branch.
git rebase <branch_name>: Rebase the current branch onto another branch (linear history).
git revert <commit_hash>: Create a new commit that undoes changes from a specific commit.
git bisect: Use binary search to find the commit that introduced a bug.
git stash: Temporarily save changes that are not ready to commit.
git stash pop: Apply the stashed changes back to the working directory.
git stash list: List all stashed changes.
10. Git Configuration Commands
git config --global core.editor <editor_name>: Set the default text editor for Git.
git config --global alias.<alias> <command>: Create a custom alias for a command.
11. Viewing and Comparing Changes
git diff --staged: Show changes that are staged for the next commit.
git diff HEAD: Compare the working directory and index with the latest commit.
git diff <commit_hash> <file>: Show changes between a specific commit and a file.
12. Cleaning Up
git clean -f: Remove untracked files from the working directory.
git clean -fd: Remove untracked files and directories.
git gc: Perform garbage collection to optimize the repository.


Git is a distributed version control system, designed to efficiently handle both small and large projects. It is built to manage and track the history of changes in a project over time. The architecture of Git can be broken down into several core components that interact to provide its functionality:
1. Repository (Repo):
The central data structure in Git is the repository, which contains all the files and history of a project.
Local Repository: Each user has their own local copy of the repository, containing all the versioned data, including branches, commits, and configuration.
Remote Repository: This is a central repository stored on a server (e.g., GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket), which can be shared among multiple collaborators.
2. Objects:
Git tracks changes using several types of objects:
Commit Object: Represents a snapshot of the repository at a particular point in time. It includes metadata like the author, timestamp, commit message, and pointers to the tree and parent commit objects.
Tree Object: Represents a directory, containing references to other trees (subdirectories) or blob objects (files).
Blob Object: Represents the content of a file. Git stores file contents as binary objects.
Tag Object: A reference to a commit, typically used to mark significant points in history like releases.
3. Branches:
Git uses branches to isolate development work. The default branch is master or main.
A branch is essentially a pointer to a commit, and switching branches updates the working directory to reflect the files and commit history from the selected branch.
Branches are lightweight, and you can create, delete, or merge them without much overhead.
4. Staging Area (Index):
The staging area is an intermediate area where commits are prepared before being committed to the repository.
When you run git add, changes to files are moved from the working directory to the staging area.
The staging area allows you to selectively commit parts of changes instead of committing all modifications in the working directory at once.
5. Working Directory:
This is the directory where files are checked out and where you modify files. When you clone a repository, the working directory is populated with the files from the latest commit.
Changes made in the working directory are tracked by Git, but they're not versioned until they are added to the staging area and committed.
6. HEAD:
HEAD is a pointer to the current branch and commit. It usually points to the latest commit on the branch you are working on.
If you switch branches, HEAD moves to point to the latest commit of the new branch.
HEAD can also be in a "detached" state if you're not on a branch (e.g., when you check out a specific commit).
7. Git Commands and Workflow:
Git's workflow typically involves these key operations:
git clone: Copies a remote repository to your local machine.
git add: Adds changes to the staging area.
git commit: Saves changes to the local repository.
git push: Uploads local commits to the remote repository.
git pull/fetch: Downloads changes from the remote repository.
git merge: Combines changes from one branch into another.
8. References (Refs):
Refs are pointers to commit objects. Common refs include:
Heads: Branch pointers, e.g., refs/heads/main.
Tags: Pointer to specific commits, e.g., refs/tags/v1.0.0.
Remotes: Remote repository references, e.g., refs/remotes/origin/main.
9. Git Hooks:
Git hooks are scripts that Git can run before or after certain operations, such as committing, merging, or pushing.
These allow for automation, validation, or triggering external actions.
10. Diff and Merge:
Git stores file differences using efficient algorithms. When you make a change, Git can quickly compute the "diff" between different versions of files.
Merge conflicts may occur when multiple users have made changes to the same part of a file. Git provides tools to resolve these conflicts manually.
Git Workflow Overview:
Clone a repo to get a local copy: git clone <repo-url>
Create a branch to work on: git checkout -b feature-branch
Stage changes: git add .
Commit changes: git commit -m "Description of changes"
Push changes to remote repo: git push origin feature-branch
Pull latest changes from the remote: git pull
Merge changes from one branch into another: git merge feature-branch
Git's architecture is designed for efficiency, flexibility, and scalability, which is why it is widely used in both small projects and large-scale enterprise systems.

What is Software Configuration Management (SCM)?
Software Configuration Management (SCM) is a process used to track and control changes in software development. It involves managing versions of code, configurations, and documentation, ensuring that changes are made in an organized and efficient manner. SCM allows developers to work on projects collaboratively while minimizing conflicts and errors.

Git File System
Git's file system architecture is one of the core reasons it is so powerful and efficient. Unlike traditional version control systems that rely on a centralized database, Git uses a distributed file system model, meaning each developer has a complete copy of the project history. Git's structure allows for greater flexibility, faster operations, and improved collaboration.
The Git file system can be divided into three main components or areas:
Working Directory (or Working Tree)
Staging Area (Index)
Git Directory (Repository)
These components are interrelated and store the project's files, metadata, and history in different ways.
1. Working Directory (or Working Tree)
The Working Directory (also known as the Working Tree) is the directory on your local machine where the project files are stored. It's the place where you can make changes to your files. These are the actual files that you edit and modify when working on a project.
Untracked Files: Files that Git does not yet know about. They are present in the working directory but haven't been added to Git.
Tracked Files: Files that Git is aware of, and can be in one of three states: modified, staged, or committed.
Changes made in the Working Directory are only visible in the Git history once they are staged and committed.
2. Staging Area (Index)
The Staging Area (also called the Index) is an intermediary area between the Working Directory and the Git Directory. It contains the files you have marked to be included in the next commit. When you use the git add command, you're essentially moving files from the Working Directory into the Staging Area.
Stage Changes: This is where changes are prepared to be committed. You can stage individual files or groups of files before committing them to the Git repository.
Staged Files: Files that have been modified and then added to the staging area with the git add command. These files are now ready to be committed.
The Staging Area gives you more control over what gets included in the next commit. It helps you to break down your changes into logical chunks, allowing for better commit messages and more organized version history.
3. Git Directory (Repository)
The Git Directory (often called the Repository or .git directory) is the heart of Git. It contains all the information that Git needs to track the history of your project, including commit history, configuration settings, branches, tags, and more.
The .git directory is typically hidden and resides in the root of your project. When you initialize a repository with git init, Git creates this .git directory, which will house the internal data structures and metadata used to manage your repository.
Inside the .git directory, you can find:
HEAD: A reference to the current branch you are working on. It points to the latest commit in the branch.
Objects (commits, trees, blobs): Git stores its data in "objects." These include:
Blobs: Store file contents (Git doesn’t store file names or directory structure here).
Trees: Store information about file names and directories.
Commits: Store information about each commit (e.g., author, timestamp, commit message).
Refs: These are references to commits, which include branches and tags. When you create a new branch in Git, for instance, you're creating a new reference to a commit.
Logs: Git keeps a log of all actions performed (like committing, merging, rebasing, etc.).
How Git Tracks Changes
When you modify files in the Working Directory and then stage them, Git creates an object for each file and stores it as a blob in the .git/objects directory. Git uses hashes (SHA-1 checksums) to uniquely identify these objects. The index or Staging Area holds the metadata about these objects, including file paths and the latest object hashes, which represent your project at any given point.

When you commit changes, Git:
Creates a commit object that references the objects (blobs) in the repository, along with metadata like the author, timestamp, commit message, and parent commits (if any).
Updates the HEAD pointer to point to the new commit.
The commit object is added to the .git/objects directory.
Summary of the Git File System Workflow
Working Directory: Where files are modified and created. Files can be untracked, modified, or deleted.
Staging Area (Index): Where files are added to prepare them for the next commit using the git add command. This is a temporary area where changes are staged.
Git Directory (Repository): The Git database where the project’s full history is stored, including all commits, references, branches, and tags.

Tags are used to mark specific points in the commit history. They are often used to mark important milestones in a project's development, such as release points (e.g., v1.0, v2.0) or significant changes. Tags help developers refer to specific commits in a repository's history without needing to remember long commit hashes.
Unlike branches, which move as new commits are made, tags are static and always point to the same commit. Once a tag is created, it does not change, making it useful for referencing specific versions of the code at certain points in time.
